# Triangles on Web Ch0 Introduction

This series introduces WebGPU, and computer graphics in general, by building a simple 3D engine from scratch. The engine will be able to render 3D models, and apply textures and lighting to them. The series is aimed at beginners, and assumes no prior knowledge of computer graphics.

Except for the basic knowledge of Rust and JS, no prior knowledge is needed. We will first use Javascript as an introduction to WebGPU, and then switch to Rust for the rest of the series, which allows for better performance and more control over the code.

WebGPU is a relatively new API for the GPU. Albeit named as WebGPU, it can actually be considered a layer on top of Vulkan, DirectX 12, and Metal, OpenGL and WebGL. It is designed to be a low-level API, and is intended to be used for high-performance applications, such as games and simulations.

As for the JS part, we will just use the native browser API, and the rust part uses wgpu in rust to interact with WebGPU. wgpu is a Rust project that provides a safe and idiomatic Rust API for WebGPU. It is designed to be a thin wrapper around the WebGPU API, and is intended to be used for high-performance applications, such as games and simulations. It also has bindings for C++, javascript and python.

We will render the Application on Web, and use the browser as the window to display the rendered image. Of course, you can also use the native window to display the rendered image.

To use the WebGPU on the browser, we need wasm, WebAssembly, which is a binary instruction format for a stack-based virtual machine. WebAssembly is designed as a portable target for compilation of high-level languages like C/C++/Rust, enabling deployment on the web for client and server applications.

For this tutorial, we use wasm-bindgen to interact between Rust and JavaScript. wasm-bindgen is a project that facilitates high-level interactions between wasm modules and JavaScript. It allows JavaScript to call a wasm function and pass JavaScript objects to wasm and vice versa.
